Welcome to the sardine challenge. So,
the only thing on the menu for the next
3 days is sardines. I challenge you to
try and eat three of those cans in a day
because that's a hell of a tool to
[music] help you get into a ketogenic
state. And when you're in a ketogenic
state, it helps burn fat, muscle mass
[music] gets higher, preserved. I've
seen patients that have reversed their
gray hair and that brain performance,
concentration, and energy. All of those
things improve. And so, I'm going to
teach you how to do an advanced
ketogenic diet.
>> Sorry, the sardine juice has gone on my
iPad. Good luck getting that off.
>> Dr. Annette Bosworth is the insulin
resistance specialist.
>> With over two decades of experience,
she's discovered that the key to your
health isn't [music] more treatments.
>> It's to get into a ketogenic state.
>> Most people have been making buckets of
insulin without knowing it. But when you
have excess insulin, it's a chronic
disease maker. It is what makes high
blood pressure. It is what makes cancer.
It is what makes debris in the brain,
which is linked to depression, brain
fog, Alzheimer's, and Parkinson's. And
so to reverse the high insulin state, I
really push my patients to do the
ketogenic diet. And what unfolds is your
best life ahead within a year. Like I
really rescued my mom from the edge of
death.
>> So where do I start?
>> First thing is quit eating so late at
night because you're stimulating an
excessive [music] production of insulin.
The next thing keep the carbs low, put
the fat up, more eggs, beef, brisket,
ribs, pork belly.
>> But then people often say when you talk
about the ketogenic diet that it's not
sustainable. So you have this idea of
this keto continuum consistently. Keto
for life.
>> Yeah. I mean, I've been on a ketogenic
diet for 10 years, and there's 12 steps
for it, and you're not going to have to
try very hard. So, the first step is
>> I see messages all the time in the
comment section that some of you didn't
realize you didn't subscribe. So, if you
could do me a favor and double check if
you're a subscriber to this channel,
that would be tremendously appreciated.
It's the simple, it's the free thing
that anybody that watches this show
frequently can do to help us here to
keep everything going in this show in
the trajectory it's on. So please do
double check if you've subscribed and uh
thank you so much because in a strange
way you are you're part of our history
and you're on this journey with us and I
appreciate you for that. So yeah thank
you
[music]
Dr. Annette Bosworth or should I call
you Dr. Bos.
What is it that you know and believe and
understand that you think the general
public doesn't know believe and
understand?
that most of the reasons people come to
see me could be reversed if they knew
how to make ketones on a regular basis.
So, I'm an internist. Uh that means uh
if you go to an internal medicine doctor
and we don't know what's wrong, you're
going to die. We take care of tough
puzzles and we do this over long
management, chronic disease management.
So, I've got 25 years of studying
chronic problems that deteriorate the
quality of life. Lifespan, health span,
both go in the toilet when you're
chronically seeing me. And you could
abort all of that destiny if routinely
you were making ketones.
>> An internist sounds like an intern. I'm
trying to understand
the marketing on this is terrible. It
just means you're supposed to take care
of very complex answers. Your job I mean
the buck stops with you. If if the
internal medicine team can't figure it
out, you're going to die.
>> So So you're basically a chronic illness
doctor.
>> Chronic disease management is absolutely
it. You know, I love the way uh Peter
Aia uses medicine 2.0, which is what we
are the masters of managing it, making
sure the prescriptions are there, making
sure you are treating all these
problems. The internist being one of
your best buddies cuz you're having to
see them routinely. You got to get the
meds refilled. You got to check for the
side effects. It's a mill.
>> What is medicine 2.0 in your definition?
Yeah. So, I can keep you from dying from
childbirth and infections. And I have an
antidote for every one of your symptoms.
We are in a world where medicine has
answered a lot of problems. Little
things like high blood pressure. Little
things like it's a few extra pounds
around the middle. Little things like
brain fog. Oh, my eyes are aging. All of
these are signals that your body has
made more trash than it cleaned up. And
there were some rules to humans that you
missed. And for for my listeners that
have clicked on this conversation,
what are they going to get out of giving
us their time and staying with us and
listening to this? What is the end goal
going to be for them in their lives?
>> Listening to the way I talk to my
patients and teach them the steps how to
reverse the medical problems that you've
already got on the roster. And by doing
that, the freedom is to be the kind of
grandparent that you dreamt of, but
you've surrendered can't be there
anymore.
And what is the list of predicaments or
illnesses that
>> yeah are relevant here?
>> Most common one is being overweight and
a brain that's not working right. What
really is behind all of the patients
I've seen for 25 years is we're working
on peak brain performance. Even if you
don't think about that, that's what I
think about. So when you come in and
you're 55 years old and I can see the
worry of Parkinson's headed your way,
super young is 55 years old with
Parkinson's. That is a brain that's got
too much trash and you don't know it
yet. And I mean in the history of Dr.
Bos versus Parkinson's, Parkinson's has
like 3,500 patients. I have zero.
Parkinson's wins every time. And the the
biggest moment of people who have
chronic problems under the hood is they
have no idea that it's coming. And once
that lands, the reversal is much worse.
seeing it 10 years before it's supposed
to be there. This is a gift of saying,
"Let me show you how to undo that. Back
away from the edge." It's that brain
function that you're going to miss the
most when it doesn't work. And it's
linked to all of these things like the
arthritis, the, you know, weight around
the middle, the high blood pressure, the
severe uh connection to mental
uh approach, meaning you can say
depression, but people say, "Oh, I don't
have that diagnosis." I'm talking about
a brain that doesn't want to engage,
that doesn't find joy in their life
anymore because it's been too many years
since they took out the trash. Let me
show you how to take out the trash. And
you're going to have to do it a few
times, but what unfolds is your best
life ahead within a year.
>> So, you're going to teach me how to take
out the trash.
>> Yeah.
>> The trash in my own brain.
>> Yep.
>> And if I take out the trash in my own
brain, how is my life going to be
better? You live in the 21st century
where there's lots of processed foods
and lots of ways that your body did
things without telling you. So any
injury that you've had, like a joint
injury that keeps coming back every time
you injure it, it it is a little easier
to injure the next time. Is there a ring
around the middle that's more more than
pinch an inch? Is there a uh distance in
time where you say, "I can focus for
this many hours, but I can't do it for
this many hours anymore." Those are all
places where if you did this, if you
were able to say, "Don't stop taking out
the trash." Several times a year,
several times a month, if you ask me,
then you never have to come into this
world that I just see people, they're
they're in quicksand. They're up to
their waist and getting them out. They
need a real lifeline. And what are the
current solutions people are typically
offered when they're feeling, you know,
all the the ways that you described
there where they just don't feel good,
they have brain fog, they're they might
have chronic pain setting in in various
ways. What are the typical solutions
that medicine 2.0 would offer them?
>> Yeah, especially if they have good
insurance.
>> Yeah,
>> that doctor is going to be with the
covered insurance plan and he's going to
say, "Tell me the symptoms. I have a
matching game. I will give you the drugs
that will take away that one and take
away that one and take away that one."
What is always a downside is well play
that forward for 10 years. Play it
forward for five years and are the
symptoms gone? No. But it will bridge
and hold up the architecture of the body
and the human without actually fixing
the problem, without actually diving in
and say you got some chemistry problems
under the hood that you don't measure
and you don't talk about. But if you
did, even if you're not perfect, even if
you're 70%,
you're going to find yourself at the age
of 54 with vitality and energy and
sleeping through the night and not
having what every other 54year-old,
which is chronic joint pain, a brain
that can only focus for 3 to four hours
without a break. Uh, a stamina of
endurance and health and and joy that
falls apart.
>> So, when I'm You're 54 years old. When
I'm 54 years old, I want to be as
young and energetic and articulate and
cognitively astute as you are. So, what
should I be doing now to make sure that
I don't decline decay in all those areas
I described?
>> Well, what did you have for breakfast
>> today?
>> Yeah.
>> Um, I have not eaten breakfast yet.
>> It's okay. That's not a bad thing. But,
uh, when you're 54, you should probably
put the calories in the morning, not at
night.
We know that as you age, the cost of a
calorie turns into timing. If you eat
that food, one bite of food after 6:00
is worth 10 bites of food before noon.
So, if you're trying to say, "How do I
get the best out of the nourishment, but
also eating's fun?" If you only get one
bite after 6:00 and 10 before, move that
food towards morning. When you're your
age, uh, what did you have for what's
the last meal you ate
>> yesterday?
>> Yeah.
>> Uh, for dinner, I had this cod and I had
salad. I also had pasta.
>> Okay.
>> But I ate pretty late, which is
>> What did you have the rest of the day
before that? Was that your first salad?
>> Just a big salad.
>> Was that more towards lunch or noon or
>> probably about 4:00?
>> So, waited all the way till 4:00 to eat.
Very common. This is a really common
pattern of people doing what we would
say intermittent or timerestricted
eating. They put that eating window in
this, but it's got that balloon at the
end of the day.
>> Yeah.
>> And it really does I mean what you're
stimulating is an excessive production
of insulin
>> and you're going to wake up the next
morning. What time did you wake up this
morning?
>> Today
>> I went to bed fairly relatively early
for me. I woke up at about 7:30 a.m. Oh.
>> Usually it's later. And do you have did
you have a solid seven eight hours of
sleep or how?
>> Yeah.
>> So during that time uh you finished
eating around 10 o'clock then it sounds
like
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So then it's 7
>> bit later.
>> Okay. So 11:00 and you've got uh 7 7:30
in the morning is when you woke up. So
that's about 8 hours since you've eaten.
Your insulin is still churning
especially if the meal was large and
there was carbs in it. So now you've got
these processed foods late at night and
you're at the beginning of the disease,
right? you're at the beginning of the
chronic inflammatory churn of how do you
age faster and faster? You don't do
that. You don't have high insulin
throughout the night.
>> So, can you explain to me like I'm a
12-year-old what insulin is and the role
it's playing because you know I guess
we're focused here on how to I guess
longevity aging.
>> Yeah.
>> For a second, but how does insulin play
a role in all of this and what is
insulin?
>> So, insulin insulates. Okay. So, think
of it as it makes you fluffy. It makes
you it puts the fat on. Uh it's got some
other roles too, but we're going to talk
about chronic diseases here where it's
not a scarcity problem. You you make
plenty of it. And when it's in excess,
it will store energy for when you go
through a famine. It will also cause you
to grow. Now, grow means get a little
fatter, but it also means things like
their skin gets a little thicker. They
have skin tags. And what I always think
about is what's going on in their brain.
And when that insulin is high for years
and years and years, uh, just like
yours, because if if you didn't eat the
rest of today and then you got up
tomorrow morning, it would be about that
long after a late meal last night,
that's how long it would take you to
say, "Okay, we're back down to where we
started from or where we should be in
the morning."
>> For someone that's never heard the word
insulin before, there's some context to
give on in terms of what it's doing. So
it's coming out like a transporter in
helping put away the sugar or deal with
the excess sugar.
>> Right. So it is what lifts Yeah. It
lifts glucose or sugar from the
circulation into a cell. That's its
first primary job.
>> But if all the cells are full, their
storage is full, it's going to start to
pack it into the liver. I mean, let's
say all those stores are full too. This
job uh of the of insulin, this hormone
oozes into every part of your body to
say make sure it's got f fuel. Make sure
it's got that sugar. But most people are
like what I would guess you are. Most of
the time you don't you aren't a shortage
of sugar. And so it feel it tops things
off and then it will turn things into
fat. It's too much sugar. They can't
store it. All the storage is full. So
you can send the signal out. Make me
some more cells. I need some more
storage units. This guy's eating more
than he thinks he is. And we're going to
be prepared to live through the famine.
But in the meantime, turn it into fat.
make him a little fluffier.
>> Is that the only consequence of high
insulin is that I'm gonna I might be a
bit more fat.
>> No, that's just the one people hear
about the most. When you look at chronic
disease management, it is the growth of
of the diseases of the inflammation.
It's the making of the trash. So, I keep
saying, you know, you you need to take
the trash out routinely, which means
that insulin, which has been smoldering
higher than you think it is because you
live in today's world, because you eat
processed food, because you eat super
late at night, uh you don't go two to
three days without eating. You've you've
got storage filled in your body. The
high insulin levels in a healthy person
hides that the debris is being made and
you don't know it.
>> It hides it.
>> Yeah. It's going to put it in between
two cells in your brain. It's going to
go in between the skin cells. The trash
doesn't get taken out until the insulin
gets lower. And unfortunately, most
people have been making buckets of
insulin without [clears throat] knowing
it.
>> Why? What are they doing to create
buckets of insulin? all the things you
said about
>> carbs, um um foods that comes from boxes
and barcodes and uh bags instead of
whole foods instead of a fatforward
diet, which would then push that body
into making ketones. So, you can't you
cannot make a ketone if your insulin's
high.
>> Are there any signs that I might have
high levels of insulin or insulin
resistance? Abdominal girth is the first
thing that is the first place that the
fat goes. So you do this really great
part where you don't eat until later in
the day.
>> How does that feel during the day?
>> During the day I feel really focused. I
actually don't even know that I'm not
eating.
>> So that's really good. So what I would
love to know is show me what your blood
sugars are doing during the day and show
me if you make ketones. That'll be the
answer is you when you have excess
insulin which is this chronic disease
maker. Uh it is what makes cancer. It is
what makes high blood pressure. It is
what makes debris in the brain where
call it depression or brain fog or
Parkinson's. It's the aging of the
brain.
>> It's linked to all of those things.
>> All of those things. And that excess
insulin nobody tells you about. But the
symptoms are, dang, I feel like I got to
eat every two to three hours. Uh their
debris uh or their fuel keeps running
out. When you say, boy, I can eat uh
once at the end of the day and I'm
pretty good. My focus stays really good.
What I want you to prove is what are
your ketones during the day. So when
when you've got a patient who has done
that, their ketones will be 7 1.0
and they're taking out the trash all day
long.
>> So there's these two energy sources. One
of them is the glucose. One of them's
which is from like you know eating pasta
which I ate last night. Um so that
probably put a lot of glucose in my my
blood. I probably had a high glucose
spike and then insulin came out to deal
with that. And then there's ketones,
which start to appear when I'm fasting
or when I haven't been eating carbs for
a while and my body's looking for an
energy source.
>> Yeah. When
>> in terms of these two energy sources,
>> there seems to be a lot of hype around
ketones.
>> Mhm.
>> So, why doesn't our body just run off
ketones?
>> It will as soon as you're done lowering
your insulin. And I mean, insulin grew
in these patients. They didn't know that
it was growing high. They went to their
blood test and their glucose looked
normal. What nobody checked for years is
how much of that insulating hormone did
it take to keep the glucose controlled.
And that's where chronic diseases are
are grown in spades. That's where
autoimmune disorder
>> the insulating hormone being insulin.
>> Yes. Okay.
>> So that excess insulin for the last
decade had you come into my clinic.
We'll put a label on it. Call it PCOS.
Call it uh high blood pressure. Call it
um autoimmune problems. All of them are
linked to high insulin. Glucose, when
you want to store it, we put it in a
fancy string called glycogen. And it's
just an efficient way to store glucose,
but as soon as your body needs it, it
will unlock all that sugar back into
your access back for you.
>> Mhm.
>> What you don't realize is, well, how
much glycogen you got stored over there?
How much is there in storage? And that
is what high insulin has been doing.
Just put it in storage. Put it in
storage. And then when you stop eating,
you'll know if you emptied out all your
stored sugar, which is some of the
regular sugar you just ate, but then all
this glycogen, this packaged sugar. How
empty are you? I don't know. Have you
made a ketone yet? You cannot make a
ketone. You cannot burn fat until that
that tank is empty.
>> Okay. So, I have these glycogen stores
which last for what, a day or two?
>> Oh, no. Think of it as brown sugar. So
you package the sugar really tight and
then you put it in the back of the
drawer and it turned crusty because you
never lowered your insulin. I have
patients that are over overweight and we
put them on a ketogenic we put them on a
20 total carbohydrates per day. So super
low carbohydrate. It is 15 days before
they make a ketone.
>> Okay? So it's it could be a a one it
could be up to two weeks for example
before my glycogen stores are empty. And
it's not until my glycogen stores my
glucose stores are empty that my body
can start producing ketones.
>> Correct. So, it's going to exhaust all
of those glycogen stores and then once
it's ran out, it's going to switch into
this ketogenic state,
>> right? Yeah. So, think of it as your
shortterm easy to access sugar has to
decrease and that means your insulin has
decreased. That hormone for insulate.
They both run in tangents. You decre
you're emptying glycogen, your insulin's
going down.
>> So, how do I know if I have insulin
resistance? What what are the key signs?
You mentioned skin tags. I've never
heard that term before. Yeah, skin tags
are not moles. So moles, you can feel
this bump on your on your skin, right?
>> But a skin tag has a neck and like a
little mushroom.
>> And it's the most annoying thing when
patients come and say, "Well, I just
tried to cut them all off, but they kept
bleeding." I'm like, "Do not cut them
off." They'll fall off when your
insulin's lower. So that's the first
place. It'll be found in their armpits
or places where their skin rubs. So
armpits and they're growing. And once
insulin starts to grow them, it's like a
crop. a crop of little baby cauliflower
hanging out in their armpits.
>> You talked about velvety skin.
>> Yes.
>> As well being an indicator.
>> Velvety skin is this Latin word
aanthosis nigraans which is fancy word
that means the skin is darker and
thicker. So the the places that usually
happens is the back of the neck. And
you'll hear you know stories of I tried
to wash my neck. It's it's dirty all the
time. It's not dirt. It is the way the
skin is under the the curse of high
insulin. And you see it in teenagers all
the time now. They put on weight and
their growth hormones are already doing
that teenage thing. Now you put high
insulin in there and they have this
dirty neck syndrome or on the creases of
their elbow. It's just darker here. Uh
that is pathology that's not normal from
high insulin.
>> You talked about weight changes as well.
What's this thing about hairy toes that
I was reading about?
>> Right. So, as my patients age, so most
my 55year-olds that have had high
insulin, I will tell them, "Look at your
toes. They're supposed to have hair on
them." And when your body has had that
high insulin state for a couple of
decades now, it will start to say, "We
don't send resources to a couple parts
of the body anymore." And the follicles
in their toe are one of them. Like, just
stop growing hair on your toes. And
there's an ascending problem with this
where the toe starts, then it's the
ankles, then it's up to the knees. and
they don't have hair anywhere on their
lower extremities. It is a process
that started from high insulin.
>> What about aging? You talked about how
if you have high insulin, there'll be an
impact on your aging. Now, I'm thinking
about, you know, I'm getting a couple
gray hairs now. I'm thinking, [laughter]
this is because of my insulin levels. I
>> I have seen patients that have reversed
their gray hair on a ketogenic diet. It
blew my mind. They asked me for the
reason why that happened, and I thought,
well, um the cells are healthier that
are making your hair. That's all I got.
Um, aging is exactly that enemy, which
is they are going around the sun with
more growing of the trash than they
needed. So that high insulin, they don't
know about it. They've not produced a
ketone in years. And that chronic
disease is now difficult to get their
the eye to clean out. It's difficult to
get that brain trash removed. And you're
supposed to do it every night when you
sleep. is not supposed to be behind this
far. You're two decades from taking out
the trash in your brain. That's aging.
>> How do I for a start even know my ketone
blood levels?
>> Well, when when a patient first comes in
saying, "How do I begin?" I want them to
tell me what they had for their meal and
then say, "How many carbs do you think
that was?" Because this education like
an apple is 20 gram of carbs, 15 grams
of carbs for some of them. And we're
going to ask you in the first six weeks
to take your carb intake down to less
than 20. 20 total grams of carbohydrates
or less is where we begin. And again, I
do this in a medical grade. There are
people who play with a ketogenic diet
and there's people who try to reverse
medical problems with a ketogenic diet.
>> In order to do this, it is not a lazy
kind of keto. You have to actually be on
the same team as me using data to
reverse this medical problem.
>> And how how does one measure their blood
ketone levels? Yeah, I I think blood is
the best. There is a way you can measure
them in a in urine. The burning of fat
if you turn that string of fat into
ketones, there are two destinies for
that. You either put it into a
mitochondria and turn it into energy or
you pee it out. So, especially when
they're early in a ketogenic journey,
they're they overshoot. Evolution said,
"Don't let them die. Turn that fat into
energy. Help them through the famine."
So the excess ketones they make end up
in their urine. We call them ketone
strips and they're cheap and easy and we
don't have to cross that barrier of
somebody pricking their finger at the
beginning. So they're going to pee out
ketones every day
as long as they're not chronic insulin
resistant.
>> So if I avoid carbs for a sustained
period of time, which could be a couple
of days, it could be up to two weeks,
eventually my body's going to say,
"Listen, we need energy." So it's going
to start burning my fat stores. Yes,
>> you know, from some of that fat around
the midsection, and it's going to start
turning that into ketones, which are a
different type of energy. Are there any
reasons why ketone as a source of energy
is better for me in terms of performance
other than the insulin reasons that
we've talked about? Like, are there any
other parts of my body or my health that
benefit [snorts]
>> ketones? For starters, when you're
burning a ketone, there's less trash.
Okay? It is a cleaner uh fuel with less
byproduct especially as you age. So you
get the longer energy and you have less
debris floating around. You hear the
word antioxidants all the time. Well,
burning ketones is an antioxidant state.
It is a and it's in the space where you
need it, which is inside that cell. Uh
you swallow antioxidants and you have no
guarantee that they end up where they're
supposed to. So number one, the fuel is
reducing trash at a cellular level. It
lasts longer and it penetrates through
that bloodb brain barrier to fuel a
brain that even if it's insulin
resistant, it can use a ketone. So the
problem with somebody who's chronic
insulin resistance, their brain needs a
lot of glucose to stay on online.
and I can try to get it there, but
insulin is constantly fighting that.
It's a war to try and keep the glucose
in their brain. My hack is ketones will
go right around that. It doesn't need
the same transporters to get across the
bloodb brain barrier and especially to
fuel those cells in the brain. So, for
performance, um I mean, name a game
where you don't use your brain. There
isn't one, right? you're you're gonna if
you're looking at performance to say
let's begin with the sharpest brains and
the most focus, the most discipline, the
less um impulsivity.
All of those things improve when that
brain is being fueled with ketones.
>> So, let's focus on the brain part then.
So, what have you personally noticed as
someone who I assume is in the ketogenic
diet right now?
>> Yes.
>> What have you noticed the variances
between when you're in a keto diet and
when you're not?
>> Right. Well, I've been doing this since
2015. So, um, the onset of it was really
messy, but, uh, the seasons where I
would do a great job and then I would
think, h, I'm fine. Uh, I mean, I can
tell you, you see 25 patients in a day
and I feel bad for the last [laughter]
five. Uh, they've got a they've got a
sluggish brain. I don't care how much
coffee you've got in you, you can't keep
that focus for that length of time. um
when you're in a ketogenic state and not
in a ketogenic state, uh the the the
brain power, the concentration, the
ability to keep your mood controlled is
is just it is a night and day difference
for most people, but I think especially
for me like uh and pretty high energy
and when it runs out, I get crabby. Uh
and that's not a good place to be if
you're the patient. Yeah, I think I've
noticed that as a podcaster, but I've
also heard a lot of very well-known
podcasters say the same thing, which is
the variance in their ability to speak
and articulate themselves and think and
sit here for three to four hours having
a conversation
>> is night and day when they are in a
fasted ketogenic state versus or on a
ketogenic diet versus when they are in a
higher carb diet.
>> And it's so profound to me that I that I
almost wonder why like more people don't
>> Oh, it's it's insane. Like one of the
best things that I've done in 25 years
was I went out on a limb and said, "I'm
going to try and teach 200 people at
once how to do this intense ketogenic
diet for 3 weeks." Uh it is hardcore.
This is not playtime. You're checking
your numbers every day and you're
comparing them to your classmates. And
what you get to see in this class of 200
people going with an extreme ketogenic
diet is the testimony you just said. I
cannot believe how good I feel. By the
end of three weeks, they're naming
babies after me. They [laughter] they
think this is a miracle. And I'm like,
exactly. I mean, when you do it in a
group like that, I don't need to
advertise. They tell their friends. They
tell their like if you want to be on a
ketogenic diet, that really wakes up
your brain that I didn't think I could
do this. I thought I was too old for
this level of energy. And it's there
within 3 weeks of doing it, right? How
long does it typically take on average
for someone to feel those brain benefits
from doing the ketogenic diet?
>> Typically, how long does it take you?
>> Me?
>> Yeah.
>> I rarely go out of it. Meaning I I might
have a couple of days where I fly to LA
and have a fancy meal and then I need to
be back on it. It just doesn't feel good
anymore.
>> So, but let's go let's go to when I was
overweight. Okay. So, you say, who's
insulin resistant? Any person who's had
a baby. Okay. You have to be insulin
resistant to hold that baby for nine
months. Okay, so I had three of them and
then the weight never came off on that
third one. So here is an insulin
resistant person at 40 something years
old and I am probably 60 lbs heavier
than I am now. In the first time it it I
tried to get into a state of ketosis for
like nine months. I was about to give up
on like why can I not pee a ketone? Why
does every I mean I'm a doctor. I'm
trying to use this for my brain
patients, but I'm afraid to tell them
about it cuz I [clears throat]
personally cannot keep pee a ketone. I
mean, I was trying to follow 50 carbs,
then I tried to do 30 carbs, and then I
try to do none. But I just couldn't make
it long enough into that ketogenic
state. And what had happened is at least
a decade of high insulin, three babies,
full practice, busy life, you know, on
call, those kinds of things that are all
dangerous if you're going to try to have
a peak brain.
I took my kids on a um 22-mile hike
around the city uh on Memorial Day in
the name of troops as mental health and
I said if I am not peeing a ketone after
walking 22 miles having fasted for a day
then I'm for sure that this diet is a
hoie. So that's how much energy it took
for me to pee a ketone because I was
very insulin resistant. I had been
making excess insulin for a decade and
I'm a doctor. I I should have known that
my sugars were fine. My hemoglobin A1C
wasn't bad. But that excess insulin,
that stored sugar, that stored glycogen,
it took forever to get that low. And
only after I fasted and then walked 22
miles did I pee a ketone. So I when you
ask the question, how long does it take?
I don't make a I do a much better job
now of telling people how to get there
cuz I I almost gave up thinking this is
junk science. If you if you were to eat
a high carb meal now and take a couple
of days off, how long would it take you
to get back into a ketogenic state where
you have those brain benefits now?
>> Uh I could probably flip back in within
12 hours.
>> So that's how long it roughly takes for
someone who's got a bit in better
metabolic shape. It will take a couple
of days.
>> Mhm.
>> Um
is there a downside to living in ketosis
the whole time? Because people often say
when you talk about the ketogenic diet
that it's not sustainable. Yeah, I hear
that a lot, but I have thousands of
patients that have been doing it for
years. And what happens is uh as soon as
they exit from the ketogenic diet and
they start to feel the trash build up
again, meaning the joints that didn't
hurt forever now hurt, the vision that
was super clear is now foggy again. The
brain that wasn't irritable and
depressive is back to doing those things
again. I mean, it is within a week or
two that I mean, I like to think of when
you're in a ketogenic state, you ring
out that inflammation and trash in their
brain and the brain is like crisp. It is
doing a great job. And when you put the
sugar back in, the swelling goes back
into their brain. Insulin and water
flood the body and it's almost like a
minor concussion
and their brain is not working right and
they now know it. And is there any other
benefits to being in a ketogenic state?
You mentioned strength briefly.
>> Yeah. So when you're looking at uh do
you do weightlifting?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So when you weightlift uh uh how
grade your soreness on the day after
your like lifting day?
>> Um if I've been using that muscle
consistently, there's no real soreness.
>> Good. So uh let's just take a day where
you're pushing it harder. You're
deadlifting harder and you've got a
strain in those muscles. One of the key
components for repairing that as quickly
as possible is to be in a ketogenic
state to take that inflammation way
down. And you probably didn't need the
help of repairing that muscle when you
were, you know, 18, 22. But as you get
into the 30s and especially into the
40s, the amount of inflammation that
tries to help you repair that, it
overshoots. And that's where the chronic
pain's from. That's where the delay in
repair comes from. So, when I look at
power and muscle training, I the first
place I talk to my patients about it is
how many days does it take you to get
back to to feeling good after you've had
an injury? Uh, let's let's be on the
side of a ketogenic setting where your
inflammation is super low and when you
tear something, which you're going to
tear things when you're lifting heavy,
the repair part is so quick. The power
is a little hard to talk about. If you
want me to go there, I can. Uh,
>> yeah. So, is there is there going to be
an impact on my my ability to train?
>> Yeah.
>> If I'm in a ketogenic diet, am I going
to be impacted in terms of endurance or
strength or power or anything like that?
>> So, we looked at this in um in military
people. uh is one of the my favorite
ones where they are all insulin
resistant and we put them on a ketogenic
diet and so they're trying to meet their
standards and at a month of being in a
ketogenic state, they've lost weight,
but their power and time didn't do
anything too sexy. Then you look at
those same soldiers at a year or I think
it was six months was the next time they
did another big check. uh and by golly,
they've lost even more weight and their
power is about 20% more than their
counterparts. When they get to 18 months
of a ketogenic diet, their power is
almost 50% more than what their
counterparts were. So, let me explain
that. As you're looking at a muscle, it
will choose which fuel it wants to use.
And when you've been glucose using when
you're on a non- ketogenic diet, it's
going to use glucose first to fuel. But
if you can train it to to use fat in
that training, it's a longer, better
fuel with less inflammation. And um
especially in a a state where it will
use both fuels quickly. That takes time.
I mean, it takes and what I tell
patients is you'll love me in 18 months.
You'll think I'm pretty great at 6
months, but if you're trying to run a
marathon and we're only 3 to 4 weeks
out, you should not start a ketogenic
diet. You're going to think it's the
worst thing ever. It's meant to train
muscles to use fat and that takes time.
>> And is there a link between some of
these cognitive degeneration diseases
like Alzheimer's, dementia, etc., and
the ketogenic diet? Cuz I know that
there's been some research that's
underway and has been done to try and
establish causality. Is there a link
here?
>> Yeah. You know, it's one of the saddest
places where if you look at what
patients regret in life, they come into
the clinic and they're already starting
to say, "I was driving the other day and
I I got lost." And when I hear that, we
are 15 years too late. It is 15 years of
building up trash in that brain that we
have to clean out that debris.
And I had the privilege of an amazing
story that taught me I don't have the
gift of, you know, seeing into the
future. Am I going to reverse these
Alzheimer's before they show up? We
don't have the research for it. Um, but
I have a lot of clinical experience
saying, "Boy, they are so much better. I
don't know if their memory is going to
stay this good. We're only three years
into a ketogenic diet, but it's way
better than when it started." And then I
had a Down syndrome patient at 40 years
old uh in my practice. So her mother
came to see me first. She said, "I I
want to try this ketogenic diet. Um,
I've been helping my daughter who's has
Down syndrome. We've lost 100 pounds uh
because the doctor said that she might
do better if um if we lost some weight
and it's not an uncommon thing to see.
They have advanced insulin resistance
and advanced Alzheimer's
earlier in life. So, it's a great uh
place to study Alzheimer's because they
have a a more rapid onset of it. So, the
woman comes, she's lost 100 pounds, and
during that time, her mental cognition
got worse. So, now she's got 100 pounds
down, but none of those brain things are
better. And I said, "All right, if we're
going to do this with your daughter,
we're going to make sure we're pricking
your finger. It's not going to be fake.
We're going to do a real ketogenic
diet." So, the mom starts on a ketogenic
diet. And I think both her and mom are
genetically superpowered to make ketones
cuz they have ketones of like three
within a couple of days,
>> which is the average would be
>> like one if I if they hit one in a few
days. I'm thinking, good job. And the
mom calls me at the end of the week
saying, "Do you think it could possibly
work this fast? She is she's, you know,
doing the little jobs that she used to
do around the house." And I said, "Well,
call me again in a week. Let's see how
she's doing." And the mom goes, "The
most profound thing just happened. I've
taken care of this girl for 41 years.
And I asked her the other day if she was
doing something. She wanted to go to the
church with me, which means she left the
house and she was at the church and she
was giving her instructions to do this,
go around here and put it over there in
the give her a little job. And she said,
"Do you understand?" And the girl
replied, "I understand."
I said, "What's the big deal?"
And the mother said she had never said a
three syllable word in her whole life.
Two syllables is all her brain could
ever put together. For the first time in
her whole life, three weeks onto a
ketogenic diet. And this Alzheimer's
diagnosed patient who had Down syndrome
now had a brain that was not only
working great, it was doing the best mom
had ever seen it. And on a ketogenic
diet, not only did she lose about 15 to
20 more pounds, but her world opened up
again because her brain, which had
Alzheimer's, no longer had that
diagnosis.
>> I was looking at some of the supporting
studies around this around the impact
can have on the brain and studies show
that in dementia, especially in
Alzheimer's, the brain struggles to use
glucose efficiently. Ketones provide an
alternative, cleaner fuel source. Um,
ketogenic diets can boost mitochondrial
function and energy availability in
brain cells. Keto lowers systemic
inflammation which is linked to slower
cognitive decline. Um, ketones may
protect neurons from damage and promote
the growth of new neural connections.
And Alzheimer's is something called type
3 diabetes which I've heard a lot. Um,
and keto improves insulin in sensitivity
potentially reducing this risk. And
lastly, small studies show temporary
improvements in memory and cognition in
people with mild cognitive impairment or
early Alzheimer's. But the evidence is
early stage long-term adurance can be
hard and the diet isn't suitable for
everyone. Uh for example, underweight
people um and people with certain
medical conditions,
>> right?
>> So how do I measure my blood ketone
levels? Is that what these devices are
here on the
>> I mean when I look at um uh giving
patients the freedom to say don't don't
come to me for the things that I that
you can do at home. First thing is be
willing to check data. Okay.
>> Okay. So, blood way better than any
other way to measure this. We're going
to be able to see. Should we have a
contest? Which one's better?
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So, you want to go first?
>> Okay. So, what I'm going to do here is I
have a finger prick here which is going
to take some blood. It's going to prick
my finger. Then I have this little
reader. And I also have this little
strip here which I'm going to put my
blood onto.
>> And within a couple of seconds, it's
going to tell me how many ketones I
currently have in my body right now. And
so we're going to look at that at the
same time as your blood sugar, which is
how you can measure insulin. It's the
best proxy for saying how high is his
insulin. So put both of them in there
before you go because then you don't
have to prick yourself twice.
>> Okay. So
>> a blue one is going to measure the
ketones and a brown one's going to
measure your glucose.
>> Okay. And this device, how much does it
cost if people want to buy it at home
and start pricking their own?
>> Yeah, I think there's a kit that comes
with about 50 strips so you can have
ketones and glucose at the same time.
I'm guessing it's around 70 bucks or
maybe it's 60 to $70. I They have quite
the Yeah. Put it all in. There you go.
And so they'll still little lights on
the other one too, right? Perfect. Okay.
So now prick your finger. Best to do it
on the side of your finger because
there's less nerves there. There you go.
Good job.
>> Okay. So I'm going to put my blood onto
this one which is the keto reader.
>> And it'll it'll count. Uh let's see. I
think it's um
my glucose is 86.
>> Takes more blood for the ketone.
>> And my ketone levels are.9.
Okay. So that's a Dr. B's ratio of 86
divided by 0.9 which is probably like 95
or something like 95ish,
right?
>> So my glucose levels at 86. Is that high
or low?
>> That's good. Uh so I would say that's
not low, it's just good.
>> Okay. and my ketone levels are 0.9.
>> Right? So when you look at them in
comparison, like you want to have a
blood sugar that's not triple digit. So
that's very good. And the closer the
higher you are above 0.5, the better the
result. So that's pretty good number.
>> So if I'm in ke ketosis,
>> Mhm.
>> what reading would I have on this ketone
meter?
>> 0.5 or greater. But it would be also
that you have that reading without a
triple digit blood sugar. So when I look
at the combination of them, I do a
little math and say your Dr. ratio is
like 95. So you are burning fat right
now.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. So that's a good sign. When I am
trying to help people who are trying to
undo cancer or autoimmune or brain
injuries, they have to have a better Dr.
Boss ratio than that.
>> Let's do your readings, okay, to see
where you're at.
>> All right,
drum roll.
>> 83
and 1.7. How are you at 1.7? What have
you done? So, I've learned that I would
love to be 33 again and be able to eat
that late at night. [laughter]
You said that I'm like, "Oh, it's been a
while since I've eaten that late at
night." It's probably the hardest thing
to teach my patients, too, is like, you
don't appreciate how much insulin you
make that late at night. Now, you're
still in a season where you get to just
kick your heels and enjoy youth. But at
my age, you cannot do that. I can eat in
the morning. I can have good calories of
high fat and good protein in the morning
and I've learned to stop eating
somewhere around three o'clock in the
afternoon. Um, in fact, if I Yeah, I
know.
>> 3:00 in the afternoon, you stop eating.
>> That's usually the case. You know what
what's really hard though is how much of
your life is social. Like you said, oh,
there was this dinner party last night
and I had pasta. And you're like, yep.
Uh, that would be something I have to
teach my patients. You have to say no to
that. You cannot be eating at 10 o'clock
at night if you want your insulin to not
to not do that deb breathing thing. And
boy, when their memory isn't going well,
when their friends are dying of u memory
problems, you know, it's I don't like
using fear tactics. I don't think they
last very long. But it is such a reality
of poor performance that I can't do
that. I cannot eat at 10:30 at night.
What is [clears throat] it about being
asleep that causes the sort of
deregulation? Like what is it about it
doing it at night?
>> So now it's going to take that metabolic
curve and in order to store all of the
part that gets stored and then turn the
part into fat that needs to be tucked
away and get back to baseline, it's
going to be 8 hours. At least 8 hours,
>> which is fine,
>> right?
>> Because I don't eat till I'm probably
not going to eat till 2 p.m. today.
>> Right. Well, you you missed one part.
The sun will rise. When the sun rises,
even if you're in solitary confinement,
you cannot see the sun.
>> Yeah.
>> Your brain knows that the sun just went
up and cortisol rises.
>> Okay.
>> Cortisol leaves your brain, goes to the
liver and says, you know, that stored
sugar, that glycogen release. You make
glucose first thing in the morning. How
much glucose depends on how insulin
resistant you are. So, you're going to
you're going to have an uneaten meal
when you wake up in the morning. Glucose
has been stored for this purpose. It's
going to wake you up. That's going to
give you the energy when sun rises to to
fuel you. If you got a bunch stored,
you're going to have a high blood sugar.
>> Can we do Jack's ketone levels? I'd like
to know where Jack is at.
>> Let's do that. [laughter] What's Jack do
for a for his?
>> We're about to find out.
>> I don't think I'm going to be
>> No. Wait a minute. Is Jack the one that
did the V2 max with Peter Aia and you
>> Well, you know, peak brain performance
is my thing and one of the hardest
brains to heal are chronic runners. That
trauma thing is real. Like it's so hard
to explain to them, too. If you're a
vegan who runs, you're in trouble.
>> 95% of vegans that listen to this
podcast frequently don't subscribe.
>> Oh, yeah. Well, all right. So, his
glucose is 88. Not too bad.
>> Ketones. Boo. Absolutely. Yeah. That's
an example of he is making trash.
There's no trash going out.
>> So, his ketone level is what the
>> 0.1 and his blood sugar is 88. So, if
you take 88 divided by 0.1, it's like
what? 1,000 or something. It's really
high. 888 probably. Uh that is a lot of
trash being made when that Dr. Bos ratio
is high. You you can't take it out.
>> Do you want to say that's his face? I
mean I feel like [laughter]
>> I just think that when Peter did that
and said, "Oh, I had no idea." I'm like,
"You could have just checked this first
thing in the morning for 5 days." If you
have that kind of a Dr. Boss ratio,
you're insulin resistant. You're insulin
resistant. You have to be hitting that
in a routine regular interval in life to
not have those problems to have
osteoporosis at such a young age. Uh a
ketogenic state would not allow that.
You would be using resources much
better.
>> He actually did a test and it turns out
he doesn't have osteoporosis but
>> Oh, good. That was
>> that was shocking.
>> Yeah,
>> it was like
>> you shouldn't have osteoporosis at your
age.
>> No, I think that was a misreading
because of the scanner, but um
>> Right.
>> but on this on this point in particular,
>> his keto levels are 0.1. So he's
basically running off glucose,
>> all glucose. And and so why is that
happening? Okay, whatever he ate, the
insulin went up. So let's say he was
your exact same eating pattern. He ate
last night. He had the 6, eight hours of
sleep. The cortisol said, "Oh, the sun's
rising." And it rose his blood sugar a
little bit.
>> Mhm.
>> Okay. When the sugar's high, you can't
you you can't your your insulin is going
to be high, too. You're not making
ketones.
>> When I did these this keto test with
most of the team here, they were all
around that region. and they were in the
region of 0.1 ketones in their blood to
0.3.
>> Welcome to my clinic in 10 years. That
is trash being made, never being taken
out.
>> And so you'd say to them, you need to do
some fasting. You need to
>> you need to cut scarves. Yeah. I mean,
if you're looking for quick, okay, if
they're in their 20s, I mean, I have
three kids, right? And they have heard
this chirp for 10 years. Uh, I mean, how
I got into this was my mother was very
sick and she was sick because of a high
insulin problem that caused cancer. So,
we put her in a ketogenic state and
everybody in the family got on board.
So, here's three little boys who no
longer have candy around. Now, they're
in their young 20s and for the first
time they're actually listening to say,
"Gosh, mom, one of them's at Georgetown.
He has to read for long periods of time
for Georgetown Law School." And he's
like, "If I'm not in a ketogenic state,
I can't keep the focus." And I said, I
said, 'Well, how are you doing that? At
first, he tried some of the supplements.
Okay, but what really happened was he
cut the carbs down and said, I can say
no to that because of the sustained
brain power. I mean, it's really easy in
your early 20s to do this. Cut the carbs
even to 50, but prove to yourself that
you made ketones and that return on your
dividends is you won't be seeing me in
25 years.
>> So, you have this idea of this keto
continuum. Mhm.
>> What is the ketone continuum? I read
about it. I mean, it's a it's a
[clears throat] book here that I have
which you published in 2020 called the
ketone continuum. Consistently keto for
life,
>> right?
>> So, the keto continuum is this 12step
process,
>> right,
>> to get into a consistent keto.
>> Consistently keto. Yeah. That you're
constantly taking out the trash. The
first part is the beginner.
>> Okay. So, the first part, the beginner
section has four stages to it,
>> right?
>> What are what are those four stages?
Well, I I like to tell patients that you
never fall all the way off of the
continuum. So, the first part the first
step is really not keto, but it is that
they're eating every two to three hours.
And if they fall off the wagon, that's
usually where they land. So, that's what
most people start at. They're eating
every two to three hours. They are not
keeping their carbs less than 20. Step
two is cut your carbs to 20. That's the
only thing I need you to measure. And
you're going to be able to use a ketone
strip, you know, measure ketones in your
urine. Uh, and that will ride you you'll
ride a wave. And that ketone production
is happening. The fat-based hormones in
your body are starting to resurrect.
They're starting to do the things that
they need to do. And there will be this
magical moment in the not too near
future where you skip a meal.
>> And this that beginning stage, how long
does that last? I'll put this on the
screen so everybody can see.
>> Sure.
>> The continuum. Um, how long does that
initial beginner stage last for people
>> if they've been severely insulin
resistant? This is the ones where I've
said they took their carbs to 20 for for
two weeks before they peed a ketone. So,
I use some other steps if that's how
severe that is. But let's just take the
average person that's like not they're
not 100 pounds overweight. They're
hitting menopause and they've put on 25
lbs. when they drop their carbs to 20,
they're peing a ketone by the end of the
week and they are missing their first
meal by day 10.
>> Okay. So, day 10 and then it says when
we get to stage five in the keto
continuum, it says 168 168. Is that
>> Yeah. So, then we start to use
timerestricted eating uh where I want I
mean we're going to your body will
adapt. People say you can't stay on the
keto diet because they go to step four
and then they think that that's all they
needed to do. There are several steps to
reversing this problem and you'll know
you have the right step if the ketones
are still present in your gut in your
blood. Your body will adapt though. So,
we start to say, "All right, we're going
to learn some new behaviors. We're going
to learn what the nothing burger looks
like at least for 16 hours out of the
day."
>> What does that mean?
>> You do not eat a thing in those 16
hours. Now, I I give them a little hedge
because most people come in like you.
They don't start eating until two
o'clock in the afternoon and then they
eat until 10 o'clock. And I want them
fat forward. I want lots of fat going in
because insulin resistance uh that high
insulin state means they've locked or
they've insulated their fat on their
body.
>> And then we get to stage seven where it
says 231. Is that fasting for 23 hours a
day and eating for 1 hour a day?
And the there's a little bitty line
between 168 and 23 in1, but there's a
whole bunch of life there. Meaning, we
don't actually have patients go from 16
hours of fasting uh to 23. We have them
slide it down by an hour, slide it down
by an hour, and then we do that harder
thing, which is move it towards sunrise.
Quit eating so late at night. And then
the last stage here, so so step 9, 10,
11, and 12 is prolonged fasting between
36 and 72-hour fasting.
>> Right? So those folks that have high
insulin for 20, you know, 15, 20 years,
they're going to have to do a nothing
burger for 36 hours in most of them to
really give a good reset of their
metabolism. And although you you look at
other folks saying, "Oh, you should
never do that if you're a woman. You
should never do that over the age of
50." I'm saying you have too much
insulin in your body. You have to do
that to get the pancreas to make less
insulin over time.
>> On that point, between men and women,
are there metabolic differences that
need to be mentioned here? Because, you
know, when I sometimes when I do
ketogenic fasting, my girlfriend, she
takes much longer than me to get into a
ketogenic state. And I'm wondering if
her body is in some way trying to defend
>> the switch.
>> Have you ever seen the the reality show
Alone?
>> Oh, no. I'm not show guy.
>> No, I'm not either. But they drop these
people off in the middle of nowhere and
they starve them to death. And you watch
the fat come off of them. And the men,
the fat just melts off of them. And the
women, they do what your girlfriend
does. It just holds on to them. That we
are designed to have that fat on them.
So asking them to do a ketogenic state,
you'll hear people say, "Oh, it's going
to ruin your hormones. Oh, it's going to
you can't do that." And um I would
[clears throat] say you can have all
those conversations once their insulin
is normal. What I have lots of women in
childbearing years that are excessive
producers of insulin and their vitamin D
is low, their estrogen is low, they have
hair loss on the top of their head, they
have skin tags throughout their body, or
maybe the first sign was they had PCOS.
Okay, all of these are a sign that
insulin came in and it's too high in
their body. So lowering it has rules and
if you want to have a baby, carry a
baby, uh have uh the weight come off
after you've gestated a baby, um have
weight not be your enemy during
menopause. You have to be making ketones
at a routine and regular interval and
start with the food. Start with the
menus in the kitchen. Don't run to the
gym first. I've noticed uh in women in
my life that they've told me that their
menstrual cycles become more synced up
when they are in a lower carbohydrate
diet.
>> Right? Their hormones can hear each
other. I mean, when insulin is high,
insulin dictates what that sugar does,
but it also is the dictator for every
morsel of fat. And estrogen,
testosterone, vitamin D, they're all a
derivative of fat, of cholesterol. And
they are they're put into the fat cells.
If you biopsy an obese woman and say,
"Can I see is there any vitamin D hidden
in there? Is there any estrogen? Is
there any?" Yes, they're all in those
fat cells, you start to lower their
insulin and the fat mobilizes. So, the
hormones that are naturally communicated
between women, they can actually hear
them again. I mean, that that tribal
thing.
>> If a woman were to stay in a ketogenic
state permanently,
would there be any disruption to her
metabolic health?
>> You mean like me?
>> Yeah. like her, you know, her menstrual
cycles, her uh yeah, anything.
>> No, I think it's you're going to find
people that it shouldn't be extreme.
Meaning, I've been on this for 15 years.
The ketogenic phase is at least 20 out
of 30 days uh in a month. The first few
years I was on it. Now, at 55, menopause
in the last year, um I'm like without a
ketone, my brain doesn't work right now
without a ketone. uh [clears throat] my
energy goes to pot and I have been
walking women through menopause for 25
years. It is not a fun story when
they're insulin resistant. So prepare uh
have the flexibility of that
mitochondria to use both ketones and
glucose and that's what a ketogenic
state is.
>> Well, we have 12 cans of sardines here
and uh I I I wondered why you you
brought sardines with
>> Well, yes. That's a hell of a tool.
Why?
>> So, um, when you're trying to help
patients change behavior, [laughter]
>> sorry, the sardine juice has gone on my
iPad.
>> Oh, good luck getting that off. Yeah,
sardines rank for uh the worst smelling,
but they're not the worst tasting. When
it comes to bitter in fish, they don't
have the bitterness that tuna does. So,
>> tell me about sardines. Why Why should I
be eating sardines? When you're trying
to teach patients, those stats that you
read off a minute ago, they don't care.
They need a very clear step on how do I
begin. And when you're working with
somebody who cannot seem to get their
ketones to rise, and I give them a whole
list of menus that's too noisy, let's
take it down to one food that is high in
fat, high in some of the best fats, high
in protein, it's whole foods, and it's
affordable for everybody under the sun.
>> Okay. So, you do you do like a sardine
fast?
>> Yeah. So in fact that that 21 day I mean
21 day is that three-week course where I
say I will teach you how to do an
advanced ketogenic diet where everybody
will be peeing ke or making abundant
ketones. On day six uh I say all right
the only thing on the menu for the next
three days is sardines. There's no
eating window. You can eat as much as
you want. There's no limit to the
amount. And what I'm pushing them to do
is not only eat a nutrient-dense food
but I want them to feel satiety. I want
them to feel full.
>> Do I need to be consuming a lot of fat
as well?
>> There's plenty of fat in there.
>> But I mean, generally, because this is
one of the the
>> things always puzzles me is I I'll go
let's say I went a week without eating
carbohydrates.
>> Sometimes I'm still not in ketosis. And
I think I heard somewhere that it's
because my fat
>> isn't high enough. So
>> yeah. So again, you at the time you went
you went seven days without eating
hardly any carbs, right?
>> And you still didn't make a lot of
ketones.
>> Okay. So you had fat on your body.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. So why didn't the fat get to your
mitochondria?
Excess insulin. Okay. You had been in a
high insulin state. So if you swallow
the fat, then you can turn it into
ketones. Right now all your fats locked
under this insulin bed. If you kept
going, it would eventually hit. But
that's painful. I mean, I have patients
who do it for two weeks.
>> So what you saying? You're saying that I
need to eat fat.
>> Yeah. So if you put the sardines in oil,
uh that's a great highfat, high protein.
Uh, it's also a little easier to
masticate the the meat and you'll have
high fat, high protein, and you'll have
beautiful ketones by by 48 hours, maybe
72.
>> And what what is the the composition of
my diet in terms of protein, fats, and
carbohydrates when I'm trying to get
into a ketogenic state?
>> Yeah. I don't let people get distracted
by this, right? I say look at your
finger. If it's got a high ketone, you
have got enough fat and enough protein
uh and low enough carbs. What most
people have is the story you told. I've
been doing this for five days. Why don't
I make any ketones? And the answer is
what is hidden behind the chemistry is
too much insulin. You've got to have And
so that's a great place to say put the
fat up, keep the carbs low, and the
ketones will come.
>> When you say put the fat up, you mean
eat more fatty foods. Give me an example
of the type of shopping list that if I
was trying to get in a ketogenic state
and stay there,
>> I would have.
>> Yeah. My one of my favorite things is uh
uh pork belly, more eggs, beef brisket,
uh ribs,
>> avocado,
>> avocado have a beautiful marketing team,
but they do have carbs in them and I've
had people overeat them. Like I have
four avocados today. I'm like that's you
you're on the wrong bandwagon there.
Avocado makes the list, don't get me
wrong, but it's not a diet of mostly
avocado with a sprinkle of chicken
breast. That's not going to get you into
ketosis. The fat has to be higher than
that. Most of the time when I'm really
struggling with a patient who just can't
seem to make ketones, can't seem to make
ketones, and they won't do the sardines,
I've said, "Eat butter for a day. That's
100% fat."
>> Okay. So, you can just have increase the
butter and
>> Yeah, you could have that. Okay. So,
that
>> Are there carbs in here?
>> No.
>> No. It's just fat.
>> Mhm. And it's not awful, but it is a
great social experiment where they
haven't felt what satiety feels like in
a while. People talk about net carbs.
They say, you know, an avocado has 12
grams of carbs in, but it has 10 grams
of fiber. So, the net carbs is two.
>> If you've never had insulin resistant,
you can do it that way. My patients have
had high insulin, and I don't play that
game. It's got to be total carbs.
Fiber is for farting.
>> Do you recognize this photo of this
lady?
>> Oh, yes.
>> Who is she?
>> Why, she is just a great story. Jane had
uh
she had pathology with how she thought
about food. Like many patients, she
she had food as the way she coped with a
lot of things. And as long as she was
clearing her plate and using that food,
it comforted a lot of wounds. When you
start to address some of these things, I
mean, the ketogenic diet doesn't fail if
you just follow the chemistry. The
ketogenic diet fails when you have
humans who've had wounds, who've had a
history, who have stress, who don't
sleep. And Jane was a great story where
all the goodness in the world couldn't
undo some of that relationship she had
with food. Uh so the first time she's
one of the coaches that I used for that
21day and she just has the best outcomes
because she was doing the a strong
ketogenic diet, you know, for those
three weeks twice a year. and she
decided that after I think the third
class she was going to do sardines only
for 30 days and she writes me at the end
of the 30 days can't believe how great
she feels and really kind of addressed
some of those demons associated with why
she would eat what she would eat and
then life hit again and she put on some
of the weight again um she'd used
sardines intermittently and she called
me and said all right I think I'm going
to do this again I'm going to just go on
sardines and really have a some come to
Jesus moments on why it why it is that I
do some of the things I do. I mean, it's
a really vulnerable moment where you can
hide those moments. You can never tell a
soul what's really going on through your
mind. And she was going to address them.
And I said, "Well, I have a bone to pick
with Joe Rogan.
He has said some inappropriate things
about sardines, like they're arsenic
poisoning. So, I'd like to check a few
blood levels in you before you start."
So, we check her vitamin D, we check her
arsenic, selenium, and a few other
things. and she starts on her sardine
challenge, her sardine journey, and she
goes a 100 days, 100 days of only
sardines. And not only does she, first
of all, her vitamin D, she did not take
any vitamin D. She stopped her vitamin
D. It went from like the 30s and 40s up
to just maybe over 100, 108 or
something. Uh, her selenium didn't do
anything naughty. Her arsenic did not do
anything naughty like Joe Rogan said it
would. and she was able to um not only
shed the pounds but really
say some truths about why she was eating
so much
and she confronted the pathology about
why why is she using food for those
other things. You know, I do this thing
in the 21day where I ask them to find
their best day in their life and I'm
trying to just get them to think about
what does that feel like? What what did
that look like? and then we go to the
worst day in their life. And Jane wrote
something that really touched me. She
said, "I don't think I've ever had the
best day of my life."
This was probably the third or fourth
time we'd done that exercise. So, she'
done it in a way where it didn't bring
any extra attention, but she was she
spoke a truth that just said, "I've had
this fear for so long
that for the first time, I'm going to
say out loud that I'm looking for the
best day of my life, and I feel like I
have the freedom to do it.
That's what happened after 100 days of
sardines.
>> So if she eats a sardines for 100 days,
she's probably not going to get like the
gut microbiome.
>> She has the best gut microbiome.
>> Doesn't she need to be eating plants to
>> Oh no. Fibers for farting. So you're
looking at a gut biome, right? And so
tell me what you think that is.
>> Uh lots of bugs that have been feeding
on plants. [laughter]
>> Okay. Yes, Pututyrate has uh has part of
that equation. So, gut biome is the
slime layer inside your gut. It's where
the critters live. It's where they set
up homes and they if you have a really
good slime layer, it's squishy. It's
dense. It's not moth eaten. It's not
aquous or waterlike. It's squishy. And
when you put plants in there, when you
put fiber in there, it tears that down.
Uh, and you say, "Well, fiber is needed
for this because some of those bugs eat
up on the fiber and they put out some
butyrate and that helps these other
bacteria to to grow." You're like,
"Yeah, that's one way to get a good
microbiome." But we haven't been fiber
eaters forever. And when you look at
many of my carnivore patients,
especially when they've got, you know,
some of those little fish scattered into
that carnivore diet, um, their symptoms
of irritable bowel, of chronic diarrhea,
of, you know, bloody ulcers reverse.
Why? Because that gut biome got a lot
stronger and a lot healthier. So, the
things that I from doing this podcast
for a long time, the things that I' I'd
be concerned about if I just ate
sardines for a prolonged period of time
or really any diet, I guess, for a
prolonged period of time, a narrow diet
would be the fiber issue we talked
about.
>> Um, and then all the other things that
are just not in sardines, I mean,
vitamin C.
>> Yeah, you still get a good vitamin C.
So, vitamin C has different rules when
you go carnivore.
>> What about magnesium?
>> Yeah, lots of that. Magnesium, I still
think is one supplement we all need.
>> What about sodium overload? Because
these are very salty, right? your sodium
churn. How well you use sodium is
dependent on how well you've eaten in
the last week. So when you increase the
sodium, those receptors get better. When
you decrease the sodium, those receptors
showed down. That's a that is an
adjustment that everybody will make.
>> What about things like mercury and the
sort of metals toxin?
>> Little fish, little problems. You got
the right one for mercury. Again, we
tested that for her, too. 100 days, no
problem.
>> Oh, especially in the can as well.
I think I've got a bit of an issue with
canned food these days because I've
heard so many
>> microplastics,
>> microplastic toxins, etc.
>> I think you're majoring in the minor
leagues there that the the amount of
benefit that people get from sardines
versus whatever might be in those in
that can. I tell patients not to worry
about it.
>> And then the last point I said was about
digestive and mood issues because the
gut microbiome is so
>> so linked to brain. Absolutely.
>> Serotonin, isn't it? the the
>> I mean serotonin is in the gut, but it's
it's a huge part of like a GLP-1 the GIP
they're all produced hormones in the gut
that are hugely impacting your brain.
And when you want GLP-1 to be made, have
a strong thick microbiome. You do not
need fiber to do that. You need
butyrate.
Butyrate is that twocarbon
uh fat that comes from acromancia you
you know chewing up the fiber, right? or
beta hydroxybutyrate in your blood.
That's that ketone thing you're got over
there.
>> These things.
>> Yeah, all of them.
>> God. [laughter]
>> There you go. Yes. It's a beta
hydroxybutyrate is what that is going to
turn into your circulation. Butyrate is
a fat chain
>> that's two carbons long. That's what the
you're asking that microbiome to say
here this long string of fibers coming
along and that that little bug is going
to eat a piece of it and make butyrate.
Two carbons of fat. That's one of these
things that you're talking about. You
need to have butyrate. You need to have
butyrate. That's what every every Why
are you even in Viterate? You got to
have butyrate.
>> All these, you know, experts come on my
show and they talk about the importance
of having a diverse
>> I know. I I've I've watched a bunch of
them. Diverse microbiome. Yes. And what
I think
>> so it's not going to be diverse if I'm
just eating one thing.
>> Oh yes, it will.
>> Measuring.
>> So that's the whole point of a
microbiome is what what you know diverse
enough to be supportive. I mean diverse
enough to have the the two chain fat
that you want to have in there. I mean
go back uh and and look at when our
bodies were just eating um you know fish
or carnivore. Uh the the beauty of a
microbiome is how much it does adjust in
every patient.
>> What about supplementation? What are the
key supplements that you don't live
without on a daily basis?
>> Vitamin D turns out to be a really
important one. Like if I'm eating
sardines uh four or five cans a week, I
probably don't need vitamin D. But
>> why is it so important? Vitamin D.
>> Yeah. It's a hormone, right? A hormone
that goes and talks to every one of the
cells in your body. and it tells that
cell to be its best version of itself.
That hormone uh goes to the nucleus and
it makes that skin cell do something
different. It makes your brain cell do
something different. It makes your heart
cell do something different. You read
all the benefits about vitamin D and you
think it's like it's like it does
everything like how can it do all of
these things and the reason why is it is
not just a vitamin. It's a hormone that
changes how the cell functions.
Unfortunately, it's made of fat.
So, if you have high insulin, it gets
stuck parked in your fat cells and it
didn't get to the cell.
>> Is there a link between vitamin D and
ketosis and weight loss and insulin?
>> Yeah, it's actually why I pointed out
that when Jane did that 100 day, uh,
she's been struggling with her vitamin D
in the 30s or 40s, right?
>> But for the best brain, we wanted to be
of 50.
>> So, she starts on the sardine challenge.
It's in the 30s or 40s, and she's
supplementing. She's taking as much as
she can, but what's happening? her
insulin was putting it in her fat. She
goes on sardines which have vitamin D in
them. By the end, her vitamin D was 105,
108, something like that. So, you can
see the experts say don't go above 100,
but the I don't I don't have any worry
about hers being 108. What happened was
she lowered her insulin and now fat can
move around in her body like it's
supposed to. And part of that fat isn't
just her estrogen, it was her vitamin D.
She looks like 20 years younger.
>> Isn't it amazing? You should see how
joyful she is. That's the part that
you're like what unlocked during those
100 days of you can say food
restriction, but vitamin D went up, uh
insulin went down, and she really said,
"How many things am I going to comfort
in my life from food?" And let's let's
let's tackle that demon.
>> Did it stick?
>> Yeah, that's the cool part.
>> The world of business looks entirely
different today than it did 15 years
ago. Back then, building a brand meant
having huge budgets, warehouses, office
space, and lots and lots of stuff. But
now, you can start a business with your
laptop, an idea, and the right tools.
And I would know more so than anybody
else because that's exactly what I did.
Shopify is one of our long-standing
sponsors on this show, and they're a
brand I often refer people to when
they're starting their businesses
because it's a tool that contains many
more tools within itself. And when
you're starting out, everything is
everywhere. It's messy, and it's
confusing. So, having everything in the
same place is incredibly useful. Shopify
puts store design, payments, inventory,
shipping, and even AI tools all in one
place. And you can sell directly from
your website or on social media,
essentially wherever your customers
spend their time. It's truly a brilliant
business tool. So, if you want to give
it a go, head to shopify.com/bartlet
and sign up for your $1 per month trial
period. That's shopify.com/bartlet.
What What about the other supplements
that you would not live without? Well, I
think the whole world's low on
magnesium. I wish I could. Magnesium.
Yeah.
>> So, magnesium is required for every
little It's like the spark plug in our
bodies. It's a little metal and it's how
ATP gets recycled and you need it for
almost every enzyme. But our food is low
in it. Our foods, our soil is low on it.
You just got to replace it. I I use
magnesium supplements, but I also have
my patients go for a magnesium float.
>> What's that? Uh, ever seen pictures of
people in the Dead Sea?
>> No.
>> Uh, they're floating, right? This the
salinity or the salt level is so high
and it stinks, right? It's a stinky
place. It's magnesium. So, they go in
there, they soak in the magnesium and
you're like, "Oh my gosh, I feel so much
better." Like, that's got to be junk
science, right? Well, it turns out it's
not. So, you can get magnesium absorbed
through your skin. And just like, I
don't know, in the 1990s you'd go rent
time in a tanning bed, you can rent time
in a magnesium float. any of this.
>> So, omega-3, if you're not doing fish,
uh you can't go wrong with omega-3. And
you know, uh I Stephen, I really push my
patients to have ketones around.
>> What? When you say ketones, you mean
external
>> exogenous ketones. Yeah.
>> So, the word exogenous means external
externally consumed. And there's some on
the table here. I'm an investor in this
company actually, so
>> that's probably worth saying. Keton IQ.
Um there you've got some other ones here
which are what's this? It's like a
>> that's ketone salts. So, this one is
just beta hydroxybuteric acid. My
husband is definitely allergic to
stevia, so I said, "I'll make this one
for you, honey. It's just liquid
ketones,
>> okay?
>> No sweeteners, no fillers, nothing."
>> And is there a difference between taking
external [clears throat] ketones through
a drink or through the salts or whatever
else versus actually being in the
ketogenic state because of your diet?
>> When you make it, it is much more
abundant. But when you do what people
do, they fall off the wag again or
they're very insulin resistant, so their
body is trying to catch up to to
equilibrate, you want ketones put back
in circulation because it will spark
their liver to make ketones. So it
really is a jump start for patients with
chronic insulin resistance, chronic
problems. We got about, you know, six
years of getting them to the healthiest
version of themselves as long as they
don't fall off the wagon. So when they
are doing okay and now they need to get
back on track, give them a dose of
ketones and by putting ketones in their
circulation like that by checking their
blood, the liver will make ketones. So
it's not just a fuel. They will feel
better. It's a signal for the liver to
make more ketones.
>> But I'm not going to be burning fat than
am I?
>> You will. I mean again ketones beget
ketones. When you are making ketones,
your body makes more ketones. So if you
jump start it by swallowing some, you
get better tomorrow. they'll get better
tomorrow. And usually if somebody's
falling off the wagon, I'll have them do
ketones for like 3 days and the fourth
day they are on their own again and
they'll stay steady for a couple of
weeks and then they'll have pasta.
>> I I that's why I invested in this
company because I'm actually a owner of
the business now. Um because I saw the
benefits of having exogenous ketones on
a regular basis,
>> right?
>> So if anyone wants to try them, go to
ketone.com
>> and your [clears throat] brain will use
it like that. meaning super fast, right?
>> When I use my ketone reader, it appears
in about 15 minutes or 20 minutes for so
>> and their liver then makes more ketones
for the next 12 hours. That's the part
that I I especially for my cancer
patients or people who are really I mean
we need ketones high for their they got
chemo tomorrow. They can't afford to say
go fast for 48 hours. They don't have
the time. So let me help you. And
there's nothing better than going into
that chemotherapy, going into that
radiation to with a bunch of
antioxidants and circulation coming
right out of your liver.
>> Explain why that matters. I mean, I've
got a photo here of her.
>> Grandma Rose.
>> Yeah. That's my mother. Yes. She is the
reason I'm here.
It's been five years. [snorts] Yeah.
2015. the the most stubborn patient
walks through the door after 10 years of
the best health care I know how to give.
And she's gray and she looks like a
zombie
and she's got big lymph nodes in her
neck. You don't need to be a doctor to
know that
she's dying. Her cancer was back again.
And we go to see the oncologist uh and
he says, "You need chemotherapy." And
she says, "Why Cal, the last two times
you did that to me, I didn't know what a
sewing machine was."
And she made all of my clothes until I
was the age of 10.
And she's nervous because she has 6
months to live if we don't do something.
And she asks me a question that
[snorts] lots of patients have asked me
this question. I just sometimes lie.
She said, "If it was you, what would you
do?"
That's a really emotional question
because there's guidelines. There's the
rules. Here's what you're supposed to do
as the doctor
when it's your mom.
And I have I saw what chemotherapy did
to her. It was terrible.
She didn't know the grandkids. She It
was terrible. And we just got her back
to functional again.
And so I said I had been reading about
the ketogenic diet on brain injuries and
I'd come across a couple of studies on
what it can do to a cancer patient,
especially an insulin driven cancer
patient like she was.
I said, "Mom, do you trust me?"
I'm like a fool.
She said with my whole life.
We were standing there in the in the
waiting room of the hospital. Well, one
way was to schedule the chemotherapy and
the other way was the front door.
Said, "Mom, let's get in the car
together."
I left my car there. I drove to my
family farm, which was 100 miles away,
and explained to my mother what a ketone
was. And her brain wasn't working right,
so she didn't quite remember.
And we went to the house. We threw out
every carbohydrate. And man, at 6 weeks
with chemotherapy, her numbers were
supposed to drop by 30% of her cancer.
We didn't tell the doctor. We just put
her on a ketogenic diet and said, "We'll
come back in 6 weeks." So, she's walking
through the door of the hospital. It's 6
weeks from there. And it is like God has
just the Holy Spirit is rising out of
her. She looks amazing.
So, we go to get her blood drawn. We're
sitting in the waiting room for the for
the cancer doctor. And he's my friend.
He knows he's known me for 10 years. So,
I'm scared to tell them what we're about
to do.
So, we're sitting in there waiting and
they come and draw our blood again,
which either means it's really good or
it's really bad.
And so, I get really nervous at the end.
We've been in that room for about an
hour and I said, "Mom, if he asks you
what you're doing, just shut up cuz I
don't know what to tell him."
And he walks in and he slides the piece
of paper over to me and says, "How did
you get her numbers to drop by 70%.
There's no drug on the market that would
do that.
>> When you say numbers,
>> her cancer numbers, so the chemo would
have dropped it by 30% and the ketogenic
diet dropped it by 70%. In 6 weeks
and she went from a 70-year-old that
looked 100
to a 75year-old who looked 40.
>> How did your your mother get on from
that point onwards?
>> Yeah, she she lived her best life. I
mean, I talk about her being from this
little town of 800 people. She was Mary
Poppins. I mean, like, you don't have a
lady's aid unless you're part of the
lady's aid in in the little small town.
You don't have a Sunday school teacher
unless you're doing the Sunday school.
She was in every aspect of this little
town. [snorts] And she went back to
doing all of it. and the pandemic hit
and there's a thrift store that she
would volunteer at because well it's
just a good place to put your time and
[snorts] the community needs it. And
while she was at the thrift store
she got CO
and her cancer was of the tea cells
which means it's going to be the first
line of defense against CO
and her her tea cells failed. Some of
some of the science behind this talks
about how cancer cells often rely
heavily on glucose for energy, a
phenomenon known as the Wahberg effect.
The keto diet drastically reduces
carbohydrate intake, forcing the body to
produce ketones for fuel instead of
glucose. Healthy cells can use ketones
efficiently. Many cancer cells cannot.
So in theory, keto could starve tumors
while supporting normal tissue. And
they've done some animal studies that
show it can slow tumor growth in some
cancers especially brain cancers like
glimoblastto
>> glyobblastoma. Yep.
>> Enhance response to radiation or
chemotherapy in certain models and
reduce inflammation and oxidative stress
creating less a less cancer friendly
environment. However, results are mixed.
Uh it may also benefit muscle mass and
weight stability in patients losing
muscle from treatment. may improve
energy levels and mental clarity for
some people and could reduce insulin and
IGF-1 levels, hormones linked to cancer
growth, may improve quality of life when
used alongside standard treatments like
chemotherapy. Um, there's al also a list
of potential risks which I'll throw up
on the screen. And I guess the summary
here is keto may help by lowering
glucose and insulin, reducing
inflammation, and supporting metabolism,
but it can be risky if it leads to
malnutrition fatigue or worsen treatment
tolerance.
>> When patients I get a lot of people
calling and saying, "Is it going to help
my cancer? Is it going to help my
cancer? Stephen, I go back to the same
thing. The amount of trash that you've
not been taking out, we have to start.
And when you put them in a ketogenic
state, I mean, it really helped her
cancer. It really did that war effect.
She was a a new human within 3 weeks.
But she had a lot of trash to take out.
This was a year and a half before she
got to be the best version of herself.
And it really did return and restore her
to to health. When I look at patients
now who say, you know, can is I am I
going to reverse my cancer with a
ketogenic diet? I'm like, no, but you
are going to deal with it a lot better.
>> I guess that's really what it comes down
to. It's like creating a better
environment so that if disease does
arrive, obviously there is a, you know,
with a lot of diseases, there is a
causal element where the way we eat and
our lifestyle does create the disease,
>> right?
>> Um, but also when that disease arrives,
what like environment is your body in to
deal with it, to manage it? And I think
a lot about this I think in part because
of the pandemic where for the first time
in my fairly young life I saw that your
current physiological environment so
your current the current state of your
body was the single biggest predictor of
your outcomes.
>> Amen. Oh it was terrible.
>> So I think 30 years old and it was like
well if you're currently overweight your
ch chance of dying from COVID is really
really high. And so I think that was one
of the big sort of protagonists in me
getting into shape was realizing that,
you know, diseases are probably going to
happen to me, but how my body responds
to it is to be determined. And I look at
how much when you're asking an elder
person to lose weight. And you just read
something really important there, which
is when those ketones are in
circulation, it is a signaling agent to
make more ketones, but it also signals
the body to say don't use muscle mass as
a resource. Go for the fat. So you can
see this protective m I mean you take
people through chemotherapy and they
have you know they shed way too many
pounds right you put them in a ketogenic
state and their muscle mass gets higher
preserved their brain function their
ability to handle this you know one of
life's most enormous fears is death and
that mood stability and muscle mass
protection because they've got ketones
in circulation boy that's the gift that
they need right now in in high numbers.
>> What is um I've heard you talk about
methylene blue.
>> Oh.
>> For brain health.
>> Ever done that?
>> No.
>> Oh my goodness.
>> What is it?
>> Well, it's old as dirt, so nobody's
making money on it. But it is a dye. And
so if you swallow it, you'll pee blue.
But it's also a bridge for how to help
mitochondria move fuel along. So, one of
the worst parts, you asked me this
question about supplements and I really
have a tough time saying which
supplements actually get to the cells
that the patients are looking for.
[snorts] There is a really great fact
about methylene blue that when you
swallow it, it actually was used for
malaria treatment or antimmalaria for
soldiers and they would check compliance
by making sure that their pee was blue.
But when they died at autopsy, they had
blue brains and blue hearts. it would
dye these organs blue. You say, "My
gosh, that's so strange." But you know
what that tells me? It got to the cells
that it was advertising it was going to
get to. So you look at methylene blue,
it's supposed to supercharge your brain.
And I'm like, "Yeah, yeah, yeah. I've
heard this before." So I I read about it
and I'm like, "Wow, there's a lot of
literature on this." And then I did what
I normally do, which is, "Well, let me
take it for a couple weeks." It was
amazing. It was amazing. Like
I I was floored at how well that little
turkey worked. So there's no money to be
made on it. It's a It's been around as
long as dirt, but it's a powerful brain
energizer. Like it helps the mito the
electrical stimulus of the mitochondria
in your brain keep energy high. And
especially for like high energy brains,
I I love it. I I'm like I put that in my
morning morning coffee which is where
the April Fools joke because nobody can
see in their coffee but they definitely
pee blue.
>> And do you take creatine as well?
>> I do take creatine. Yeah. Yeah. It's
great. That brain supplement is awesome.
Do you do
>> I do but my doctor the other day I think
he was suggesting that I might have
taken too much.
>> Why?
>> Some liver scan I had and he was saying
that
>> liver scan or kidney scan?
>> Kidney scan. That was
>> kidney scan. So that's a trick. Don't
don't fall for that. I mean, I've done a
couple of big shows on this where
creatine is what you're going to measure
kidney function with. When your doctor
checked your kidneys, he probably had
you pee in a cup and check your blood.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, he's looking at what did you
pee out and what how clean is your
blood? That's what kidneys do.
>> He just did a blood test.
>> Okay. Well, even the blood test, it the
trash was looking like it was a little
higher because the trash we're measuring
is creatine, creatinin, uh, and which is
made from your supplement. So, you put
the supplement in and it looks like
there's more trash around, but That's
just the supplement. It's falsely
elevated. It's not true. You your
kidneys did not get hurt by that. This I
answer this question probably 30 times a
week. I have a standard email saying,
"Here's what happened. Don't measure
that." There's other ways he could have
measured your kidney that would not have
been manipulated by that supplement. Uh
what it does for brain function,
especially if there's any ADHD, man,
they love it. They they just focus for a
long period of time. I mean, it's got
other great findings like if you how how
often do you fly over to London?
>> I fly alone.
>> Yeah, that's the best part about it is
that the the the jet leg part of it.
There's really good studies on this.
Like your reset of sleep is going to be
augmented if you take like 20 grams of
it after the flight, 10 in the morning,
10 at night. Uh and those are great
studies like you [clears throat] know,
Navy Seals sleepdeprived.
Watch what happens when you add
creatine.
>> A lot of women don't take creatine
because they've historically thought of
it as like a bodybuilder thing,
>> right? It's a brain thing.
>> And you take creatine every day.
>> How much do you take?
>> So, two scoops.
>> Yeah.
>> Every single day.
>> Every single day. Seven days a week.
>> I put my methylene blue in it, too. Down
at first thing in the morning. I got
blue dyed creatine.
I mean, those two supplements are just
they they blew my mind with the amount
of research out there. And then I did
them. Uh I mean, I'm not a big
bodybuilder. I do some CrossFitty kind
of stuff three times a week. Um, so
there's that, but I do it for the brain
stuff. The brain stuff is really
impressive.
>> At the moment in society, people are
talking a lot about JLP1s and a Zmpeek
and all this kind of stuff. And um, I
was wondering if there's any harms or
downsides in your view of using these
amp WGO JLP1 protagonists
>> antagonist agonist.
>> Agonist agonist. And if there's a
natural version for those of us that are
looking to have less cravings,
um, but we don't want to take GLP1s. We
don't want to be injecting ourselves.
>> Yeah. So, those hormones are powerful. I
mean, you if you think that weight loss
isn't a hormonal problem, uh, show up at
a medical clinic that that they are
powerful hormones that hijack people
into a healthier uh, or at least a
weight loss stage. But when you're
looking at using this powerful hormone,
okay, and use it for a short time, use
it for a long time. What are the rules?
These are brand new. One of the
analogies I use for patients is, uh,
Stephen, if you wanted to have legs with
no hair on them, how would you
accomplish that?
>> Shaving them,
>> right? Because that would be short-term,
easy, and reversible. You would not take
chemotherapy, the most powerful,
amazing, they'll be every hair on your
body will be off in the next two weeks.
and it's short term they'll come back
but there's a price to pay when you're
using a really powerful unit to do
something for a vanity reason. So it's
where I like to begin when I talk about
GLP1s.
It's it's amazing. You will lose fat and
>> what do I do instead then?
>> So there's great ways to lower GLP1s or
great ways to raise GLP1s, right? Uh for
starters um when you're overweight it
suppresses it a lot. So getting the
weight off is a huge part of it. That's
why this ketogenic diet is so powerful.
Will get the weight off and that will
lift naturally the GLP1s.
>> Is there other ways to suppress um well
suppress I was going to say suppress my
appetite but more to just get rid of the
cravings?
>> Well, you'll suppress the appetite by
raising those hormones. So you put in
alulose. That's a great little boost to
that. You put in butyrate. Whether or
not that's the bug that you were talking
about or the supplements, butyrate
increases and stimulates GLP1
>> and butyrate just for for those that
might not know that word again,
>> right? That's a that is what a ketone
looks like floating around your blood.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. Uh so a ketogenic state will raise
those hormones and suppress appetite.
>> I've seen a bunch of studies on that
that show that when people are high in
>> ketones,
>> ketones, they have a a suppressed
appetite,
>> right? And that is linked to the
production of some of these hormones,
these really great hormones. But you
make them naturally. And so it's not the
addiction part, it's the natural way to
make it. I
>> I do find that anyway. I find that when
um I guess it could be something to do
with my dopamine receptors as well in my
brain, but I find that when I'm in a
ketogenic diet, my cravings for the
things that I once craved, like I don't
know, like carrot cake or cinnamon
rolls, they just completely seem to
vanish.
>> That's the same thing that happens when
you give them that shot too.
>> Oh, really? When you give them JLP1?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. And I mean the beautiful part is
you're young. You'll make a lot of GLP.
You've already made healthy GLP-1.
You'll hijack and suppress it by being
overweight and high insulin. So
constantly delivering ketones to your
blood, that's how you keep it high and
you don't end up on the shot, which is
expensive and very powerful. I always
think, you know, when we give people
advice on things like weight loss,
>> there's always a part missing, which is
this part about like discipline and
motivation or whatever one might call
it,
>> which is the is gives somebody the sort
of activation energy to even stick to
it. Do you think about this much in your
patients? You talk about motivation.
>> It's huge. I mean, again, most people
show up because there's been a recent
crisis. Somebody died, they had a
diagnosis, something broke, they didn't
repair well. All of that is true and I
can get them motivated for a little
while. And then we have the long game
and you look at that story with a
hundred days of sardines. Okay, that's
two years into her journey where she
finally says, "Okay, there's this demon
that keeps coming about and I keep
falling off for all the wrong, you know,
all the reasons everybody else does."
And so she commits to this 100 days and
what happens is a whole bunch of things
go right. Her hormones go up and she was
has an amazing story. But most people
are not going to do that. So, in my
practice, I do say these the smallest
dose of these hormones, I'll help you
when you're struggling. I want you in a
ketogenic state before we we begin. I
can use much less that hormone. And then
you have ownership of this because if I
come in and do all of the work again,
that's like every other thing I've been
doing for the last 20 years. Here's your
symptom. Here's my diagnosis. Here's the
prescription. And I need it to be you
that succeeds here. I'll lift you a
little bit. So what do you is there any
tricks to get someone to be motivated?
Is there any do you have to focus them
on their why?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Exactly right. You're right. Uh
that that first trick is get out of
crisis mode. Okay. Crisis is what brings
them in. But to stay the course, you
have to get to a very serious moment
where you say, "What? What motivates me?
What at the deepest heart am I most
insecure about that I'm going to do when
all else fails? When everybody else
gives up? I'm gonna find something that
I'm this little farm kid from the middle
of nowhere who was, you know, third
grade stinky girl. You like I was a farm
kid. I was a hog farmer's daughter. I
wasn't the smart one. I wasn't the, you
know, the best one. I'm going to carry
that insecurity with me until the day I
die. What has that done? It makes me
work really hard when everybody else
gives up.
Now finding that for them and and using
that using that harness to say your
biggest failure your biggest insecurity
can be your power by reframing it
and that why we work on that every time
we do that 21day
Jane she did that four times before she
really got to the core center why do you
keep doing this that's how people stay
motivated it's a truth it's a truth
serum
All I had to do was brain dump. Imagine
if you had someone with you at all times
that could take the ideas you have in
your head, synthesize them with AI to
make them sound better and more
grammatically correct and write them
down for you. This is exactly what
Whisper Flow is in my life. It is this
thought partner that helps me explain
what I want to say. And it now means
that on the go, when I'm alone in my
office, when I'm out and about, I can
respond to emails and Slack messages and
WhatsApps and everything across all of
my devices just by speaking. I love this
tool. And I started talking about this
on my behindthescenes channel a couple
of months back. And then the founder
reached out to me and said, "We're
seeing a lot of people come to our tour
because of you." So, we'd love to be a
sponsor. We'd love you to be an investor
in the company. And so, I signed up for
both of those offers and I'm now an
investor and a huge partner in a company
called Whisper Flow. You have to check
it out. Whisper Flow is four times
faster than typing. So, if you want to
give it a try, head over to
whisperflow.ai/doac
to get started for free. And you can
find that link to whisperflow in the
description below. Have you ever heard
about this before? This thing I'm
holding in my hands now. This is called
ketone IQ. Their website is ketone.com.
You've heard me on this podcast talking
about the fact that I stay much of the
year in a ketogenic state, which is a
highly restricted diet. And the reason I
do that is plentifold. One of them is I
spend hours and hours talking to people
for a living. So I want to make sure my
brain is firing in an optimal way. And
the other reason that I do the ketogenic
diet is because I just feel better. So
when I discovered this, which is what
they call an exogenous ketone product
where you can drink it and it increases
your blood's ketone levels, I was blown
away. I contacted them, I met them, I
invested extremely heavily into their
company and I've become a co-owner of
the company accordingly and they sponsor
this show now. So, if you want to try
this out for yourself, I recommend you
try it. Just visit ketone.com/stephven
and you'll get 30% off your first
subscription order. You'll also get a
free gift with your second shipment.
That's ketone.com/stephven.
I was reading about what happened to you
in 2011 2010 2011 when you reached what
you you referred to as your breaking
point of corporate medicine.
>> Yeah. And you had some issues because
you were, I think, helping some people
who were homeless.
>> Yep.
>> What What do I need to know about that?
And how has that shaped you?
>> Corporate medicine has lots of flaws and
you get tired of answering the same
question over and over and over again.
So, you put some stuff up on YouTube and
you start to say, "Here's the education
I wish I could give you." Uh, and this
starts to work, but that's not the
that's not the path. If you're into
corporate medicine, you're going to
ruffle feathers. You're going to tick
people off. [gasps]
I left corporate medicine, started my
own thing, and I'm living out a two-year
non-compete. Do you know what that
means?
>> But you can't do medicine for two years
>> in that same market where they recruited
me and they had advertised for me.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. So, you can't compete with what we
just put money into for two years. And
they said, "You can see the homeless and
you can see Medicaid." Medicaid being
the like government funded med medicine
program,
>> low income. So I said, "They don't know
me very well. Those are just as much my
people as anybody else. I'm taking care
of some Native Americans. They were the
ones in the shelters. They're the ones
of the low income. And those teenagers
were overweight and they were eating
kitty litter. They were eating toilet
paper. Their iron was so low the machine
couldn't measure it. So they're super
malnourished." I started doing what I
would do if you had all the money in the
world. I took care of these patients. I
gave them IV iron.
>> She gave them iron, which
>> was expensive. It caused a ruckus. I got
put on the radar of somebody that did
not like that. So, this is a budget. The
whole state gets a budget for how much
you're going to spend on each patient.
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, by expensive, it was like 350
bucks per person. That's not that
expensive,
>> but [clears throat] it was. And nobody
else was doing it. And I got a sticky
note inside an envelope from the state
capital. Stop doing Cadillac medicine.
Yeah.
>> So, you you were sued eventually.
>> Oh, they they call it Medicaid fraud.
>> Okay.
>> They thought I was wasting Medicare's
numbers because I was giving IV iron.
And I said, "No, I didn't bill for it.
Bill for it. I paid for it." And when I
paid for the medicine for these
impoverished patients, they said, "Well,
that's Medicaid fraud." So, the
government tried to sue me for that and
they lost. But now they're ticked off.
They've brought me to court and they
lost. And what happened next is a lot
worse. I don't know if you want to hear
that. You want me to go there?
>> Of course. Yeah.
>> Okay. [sighs and gasps]
So, when you are being investigated for
Medicaid fraud, all income stops.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, I have to come home to my
husband and say,
"I just can't I can't give in. I think
we need to fight this." He said, "Okay."
He he God bless him. He said, "Okay,
let's fight it." Have you ever tried to
fight the government? That's very
expensive. So they hold off you you when
you're under a Medicaid and fra fraud
investigation, you get no paychecks. So
we have no paychecks to pay payroll, to
pay house payments, to do anything for
about 9 and a half months. Actually, it
lasted longer than that. During that
time, we started doing things like we
sold the lake cabin, we sold the boats,
we sold the extra car, we sold our own
house, we moved into a donated RV. You
moved into a car,
>> an RV. Yep. In South Dakota where
there's 50 below zero weather with three
little kids.
We actually used we took our wedding
rings in for the last paycheck.
I I just can't give in.
And then I won. Okay. So, Medicaid fraud
wasn't there. But in the midst of that,
I said I This was when Obamacare was
really happening. and I got asked
[clears throat] to run for US Senate.
There's only a hundred of those in the
country.
I ran for US Senate and I did really
good.
I raised
insane amounts of money uh saying I am a
doctor that serves the poor. I am a
physician that runs her own company. Uh,
I think I am a great voice to send to
Washington DC to make policy about
patience and care
as opposed to the other opponents.
But that same attorney general, his best
buddy was running against me. And when I
am in a mission trip
uh in the Philippines, that has nothing
to do with it, but I was on a mission
trip in the Philippines and um I left a
petition behind. I don't know how you do
it in London, but a petition means if
you're going to run for office, you got
to get some people saying they believe
in you.
>> Mhm.
>> So, we needed 2,000 signatures. And we
got 6,000 signatures. We submitted them
to the state. We think there's no
problem.
But then the quarterly earnings come
back for a campaign raising. And my
opponent had about 70 donors at about
$10,000 a pop and had something like
$740,000.
I put my earnings in and they
[clears throat] were $780,000.
So I outraised him. You have to report
to the government whenever somebody
gives you more than $200. So his donors
are right there on the list.
My list is empty
because the average size of the donation
was $45 and they know they can't win
with that. I have a grassroots behind me
and that's when the black cars started
showing up in my life. It sounds like
I've got a tinfoil hat, but it was real.
>> The black what?
>> The state card started to show up
outside my house. They started to say,
"Find something on her."
And I am the first person in the history
of the United States of America
to be investigated for not witnessing a
signature on those petitions.
>> Okay. So, there was these petitions. You
had to get 2,000 of them signed and you
had to witness them. So, you had to be
there when they were signed by people.
>> Well, that's what it says. And you're
right. It says, "I bear witness." Uh, so
as I'm I left them in my clinic, my
staff signed it, the preachers in my my
clinic signed it, and those signatures
were collected while I was in the
Philippines.
>> And so you signed to witness them when
you were back from the Philippines.
>> Right. So I didn't witness them. I just
vouched that that's my sister, that's
the preacher, I know who these people
are.
>> And so they charged you for they
realized that you were in the
Philippines at the time, so you couldn't
have witnessed them based on the dates
or something. Yep.
>> And then they arrested you.
>> 12 12 felonies.
>> They give you 12 felonies
>> and 24 years in prison.
>> That's what they charged you for or
that's what
>> they charged me with 12 felonies. Six
counts for each of the six petitions.
Six. Uh so there's 12 felonies. There's
six mistakes, but each mistake counts
for two felonies. I mean, if you're
going to make a mistake, there's one
felony. When you're trying to make a
statement, there's 12 felonies
and you're the first one in the history
of the United States of America to ever
have this charge, let alone brought to
trial and then found guilty. The trial
didn't happen in my state, my town. It
happened in the state capital
where everybody knew that attorney
general. Everybody knew the opponent.
>> So they they tried to get you to serve
24 years in prison.
>> Yeah. They sentenced me to 24 years in
prison.
>> They sentenced you to?
>> Yeah.
>> My kids are sitting behind me. I'm You
are guilty of 12 felonies and 24 years
in prison.
And then he says, "But this stack of
papers in front of me might be the
biggest." He'd been a judge for 20ome
years. And I had patients who had
written in saying, "This is the best
doctor I've ever seen." I didn't ask
them to write that. They just sent them
in.
>> That moment when you hear that you're
going to be in prison for 24 months, 24
years.
>> Oh god. It is the lowest moment of my
life
because I mean I do not like that the
that that story cost the state of South
Dakota any money. But I also don't like
that when you oppose
the the political giants
and you stand there with all of the
right intentions that if they need to
find something on you, they will.
six petitions and we had a thousand
extra signatures.
There was nothing. This was a nothing
for her, but it was enough. And that
attorney general said
prosecute her to the fullest extent. And
I'm not a martyr. I do things that
aren't right. And if there was a mistake
that I made, I I would take full
ownership. And to that judge, I made I
took full ownership
that the attorney general was he won.
I got sentenced.
>> But you didn't have to serve the 24
years.
>> He said, "I'll probate that. Uh I will
suspend that with um the highest number
of service hours ever in the state of
South Dakota was 500 community service
hours serving the poorest patients in
the state." And when he said those
words, I thought, "Oh my god, you don't
know who I am.
That's what I've been doing. I was
already working in Pineriidge. Well,
>> how do you how do you feel about all of
this?
>> I mean, I think of it as a test. It was
a test of I mean, most marriages aren't
going to make it through that. If you
got kids, they'll end up in rehab with
that much stress.
And I didn't want that life. I didn't
want that to be my
ending. I framed it different. I said,
"All right, God, you're testing me.
you're testing to say, "Can I be can I
stay true to who it is that you've
called me to be?"
That
our marriage was incredibly uh that's a
lot of pressure. I mean, I was the
number one news story in the whole damn
state for 3 years running by a mile.
I can't go anywhere without That's her.
That's her. My parents were ashamed. My
kids would say, "This is the woman that
takes me to Haiti. She is Mother
freaking Teresa and now she's on the
front page of a newspaper as a 12-time
felon. And your teachers at school say,
"I read about your mom in the
newspaper." I mean, it's
it should have crushed me.
>> But it didn't.
>> It did not.
>> When did your life begin to turn upwards
from that point onwards? When was the
the moment where
things were
>> Well, the first thing is we appealed
that to the Supreme Court.
>> Yeah,
>> that's where the big legal bills come
from.
>> I mean, you're fighting an attorney
general. That's where And the Supreme
Court said that that attorney general
abused his power for at least six of
them. And then that judge said, "I'll
erase all these because of the work
you've done." So, the 12 felonies went
away during
>> all of them.
>> All of them.
I think on the edge of that story, um I
work to resurrect people's health back
to a place where they they get their
best life. And yes, ketones are a really
big part of that.
But as you look at the relationships
you've got around your life, take the
core ones and nurture them to a place
where uh your best life comes out of
those relationships. find that purpose
that you've been designed for and take
those relationship with you as you seek
that. I I know that's what happened to
me. I cared about the ones on the inner
circle and I had a one track of this is
what I'm designed to do.
We have a closing tradition where the
last guest leaves a question for the
next and the question left for you is do
you have a daily practice to find deep
inner peace when you are emotionally
triggered and if so please share it with
the audience.
Yeah, I have a a devotion that I do
every morning that um that centers me,
keeps me in line with my faith.
And it's not that you do it on the bad
days, it's that you've got the
foundation for doing it on the good
days. And there are generations
a daily devotion [clears throat] like
upper room is a is a spiritual devotion
for my church.
>> What What does that look like? Is it a
prayer or
>> Yeah, it's a prayer. And
>> And how does that sound? What is
>> Yeah, the it's usually a scripture and
then it's a prayer that has been paired
with that scripture. And again, it's
easy to not do it routinely. But when
you practice it on the good days, it's
what lifts you on those really tough
days.
And sometimes you forget you're not the
first person to run through these
problems.
But there are thousands of generations
that have taught you how to do life and
get through those hard places and I'm
going to use their rules.
I'm going to follow what that scripture
says
and lead for my best life.
>> Dr. Boss, thank you.
>> Very good.
>> We are done. I really think I really
appreciate so much about you. I
appreciate your personality. Well, I
>> incredibly engaging, but I also just um
I appreciate that you've taken the time
to make so much content over on your
YouTube channel, which I'm going to link
on screen and below now, um to sort of
demystify and break down some of these
really complicated subjects that people
struggle with, and they're looking for
someone who they can trust, who has a
bit of personality, um who can
communicate some of these very
complicated things to them. And on your
channel, you talk about everything from
the ketogenic diet to many of the things
we talked about today to the creatine
stuff to cancer more broadly, this idea
of autophagy and fasting, um, and lots
of other things. I mean, everything
we've talked about today and much, much
much more. So, I highly recommend people
go and check your channel out if they
would like to learn more, it will be
linked below. And, [snorts] um, you've
written some wonderful books. Um, some
of them that we've referenced, we've got
the Keto Continuum, which I'm going to
link below as well. um this wonderful
book called Any Way You Can, a
beginner's guide to ketones for life,
which um talks a lot about Rose and has
some wonderful photos of Rose in that
book. And we have the keto continuum
workbook, which is a much more practical
um
>> yeah, it goes hand inhand with the other
one and it's what I give my patients in
the clinic is they got to go through
that workbook.
>> I think a lot of people are looking for
exactly that. They're looking for
something that they can follow step by
step which gives them a framework for
progress and I guess in in a way holds
them accountable which is exactly what
the workbook does. Thank you so much.
You're you're helping millions of
people. You've had a [__] rough ride
if I'm being like 12 felonies in 24
years in prisoners for for something as
as little as what you did I think is is
bizarre quite frankly. But you know it's
a story of inspiration that it didn't
hold you back and you've risen like a
phoenix and created so much incredible
work therefore that's benefited so many.
So, please do keep going.
>> God bless you. Thanks for having me
here. I'm really excited to be on your
show.
>> Thank you so much, Dr. Buzz. [music]
>> This is something that I've made for
you. I realized that the direio audience
are strivvers. Whether it's in business
or health, we all have big goals that we
want to accomplish. And one of the
things I've learned is that when you aim
at the big big big goal, it can feel
incredibly psychologically uncomfortable
because it's kind of like being stood at
the foot of Mount Everest and looking
upwards. The way to accomplish your
goals is by breaking them down into tiny
small steps. And we call this in our
team the 1%. And actually this
philosophy is highly responsible for
much of our success here. So what we've
done so that you at home can accomplish
any big goal that you have is we've made
these 1% diaries and we released these
last year and they all sold out. So I
asked my team over and over again to
bring the diaries back but also to
introduce some new colors and to make
some minor tweaks to the diary. So now
we have a better range for you. So, if
you have a big goal in mind and you need
a framework and a process and some
motivation, then I highly recommend you
get one of these diaries before they all
sell out once again. And you can get
yours now at the diary.com where you can
get 20% off our Black Friday bundle. And
if you want the link, the link is in the
description below.
[music]
Heat. Heat. N.
[singing]
>> [music]